>>You will not find a
more engaging presentation
on the subject of healing
and the human cell
than what you're about to see.
Bruce Lipton's work
in cellular biology
has rendered many
aha moments as he
has come to understand that
our bodies and state of health
are a direct reflection
of the harmony
or disharmony within a
vast community of cells
that we're made from.
In other words, a happy
community of cells
makes a happy body.
What's more, he discovered
that cells do not
operate as the textbooks
would teach us.
He says that we are not
just biological machines,
rather every cell in
our being communicates
not only with each other,
but with a vast field
of intelligence.
Why don't we pick
it up with where
you began with
cellular biology, where
your frustrations in
looking for answers
occurred, and then your big
aha in 1985, 20 years ago?
>>I started cloning stem
cells as my basic research way
back in 1967.
So while people think
that stem cells are
a current kind of
phenomenon, I actually
was working on
them 40 years ago.
And the significance
about the work
on cloning these
cells was I started
to recognize that they didn't
really necessarily correspond
to the beliefs that I
was teaching about how
cells worked in medical school.
So there was this
disconnect where
I saw them behaving in
ways that were aberrant,
or out of the ordinary.
And I tried to figure
out what was going on,
and what was the difference or
the discrepancy between what
I expected them to be doing
and what they were doing.
And then finally got
down to an understanding
that they were more or
less being controlled
by the environment and
not by their genes.
And it was interesting because
that actually hearkens back
to my first day of
culturing cells,
my very first experiment
with culturing cells.
And my mentor, Irv Konigsberg,
a brilliant scientist,
was telling me, just as I
was putting my first cultures
into the incubator,
he said, "When
you come back tomorrow morning
and look at these cells,"
he said, "if they don't look
well, they look sick," he said,
"before you blame
the cells for this,
the first thing
you must consider
are the conditions in the
environment, the culture
conditions."
And it was funny because
that remark seeded an idea,
but it didn't realize itself
for almost 20 years later
when I realized at that point
that, indeed, the cells were
directly responding
to their environment,
and not responding to some
program in their genes.
>>Now, this is not what
traditional medicine
is saying even to this day.
>>To this very day, they're
still behind the concept
that we are genetic automatons,
and that our characteristics
and our traits that we
express in our lives
are really tied to the
blueprints of the DNA
that we received at birth.
So the significance is is that
conventional medicine sees us
as a robotic device, and that
our attributes or deficiencies
are merely a reflection or
an expression of the genes
that we acquired during
the conception process.
So that our fate is more or less
an unfoldment of our genetics,
which is a concept called
genetic determinism,
a belief that our
characters are already
predetermined at the moment
of conception and our life
is just an unfoldment
from that point.
>>Which, as you have pointed out
in the past, and to audiences
worldwide, that makes
us victims of our genes.
So this creates a
mindset with it.
>>Yes.
So the people look at their
illnesses or their problems
in life as being something
they have no control over,
and therefore, it forces us
to go outside of ourselves
to seek help and answers.
When, in fact, the new biology
reveals that all that healing
ability was always within us.
Which, if you think about
it in an evolutionary sense,
there were people, humans
here for a million years
before there was medicine.
They obviously
survived very well
and did very well self healing.
And this is what the new
biology is taking us back to,
is that, before we saw
ourselves as victims.
If there was something wrong,
we'd go to the outside.
We'd look for a
drug or a chemical
to correct the
functioning of the system.
Now, with the new
biology, we're recognizing
that we can adjust
our own chemistry,
but we have to do it through
our consciousness and our issues
of our perceptions of
how we see the world.
And why that's
really a freeing up
is that-- think about it
this way-- it's easier
to change your perceptions than
it is to change your genes.
And that when we
recognize that perceptions
run the show, when we start
emphasizing our beliefs
and our psychology
behind our health,
that is a
self-empowering process.
>>Going back to the
medical world as it
exists today for just a moment.
If you're watching
television, it
seems as though now a very high
percentage of the advertising
behind news programs, prime-time
programming, et cetera,
is pharmaceutically-based
advertising.
Meaning, at this
point, before we
go into what the new biology
is and the actual percentage
of how much we are
determined by our genes,
even if this is now known
and has been proven,
what's it going to take
for the medical industry
to acknowledge this when
there's so much vested
in pharmaceuticals?
>>Well, it's a
wonderful question,
and the same question can
apply to another issue, which
is a parallel, so
that people can see
that there-- the parallels
between these two.
And that is, we are very
much familiar with the fact
that there are many
different forms of energy
than burning fossil
fuel, that many
of these other forms
of energy are much more
efficient and more practical
for us to be using.
And yet, you say,
well, then how come
we are so limited
by the fossil fuels?
And the answer is because
the petroleum industry's
selling fossil fuels.
They're not selling free energy.
And then the parallel
exists, is that
the pharmaceutical industry
sells chemical medicine.
>>Cures.
>>Chemistry.
And if I can suggest that you
can heal yourself with energy,
well, they can't sell the energy
so they're not interested.
So the issue is, it's a
bias toward a product.
And this bias, from an industry
that has that much money,
is restricting us from
the evolution that
is in front of us,
because as long
as they keep diverting
our attention
and selling drugs
as a belief system,
because most drugs are no
better than placebo anyway.
Even the largest selling drug in
the world, for example, Prozac,
is scientifically
demonstrated to be
no better than a sugar pill.
And yet, my god, the billions--
>>Side effects.
>>--of dollars and-- Well,
that's the interesting thing
about-- they could sell placebo.
It would be safer,
because placebos
don't have side effects.
>>Exactly.
>>And yet, they sell us a
placebo with side effects,
and so the issue is,
what's the difference?
And the difference is
that the placebo is really
just an effect that
says, by my mind,
I take a drug with the
intention of healing myself.
I give the power to the
drug, but it was really
the intention.
So taking a drug, whether it's
a sugar pill or a real drug,
it's still the
intention of healing
that I'm putting into my system.
So that's where the
power comes from.
>>So let's backtrack now
and go to the new biology,
and talk about just
how little of what
we are has actually
been determined
by our genetic structure.
>>Well, the genes
are very important.
I'm not going to just say
that genes aren't important.
Genes are blueprints,
number one,
and they're blueprints
to make proteins.
And the proteins are the
building block molecules
of the human body.
It's like a giant
Tinkertoy set with all
these different shaped parts.
And the parts are
the proteins, and you
start to plug them
together and assemble them.
And from that assembly, you can
create all the different kinds
of cells, liver cells,
brain cells, heart cells
by different assemblies
of these proteins.
So the genes are important
because they provide
the blueprints to
make the proteins.
Yet we've gone
beyond, giving them
powers that they
don't really have.
We give them powers of,
like, self-actualization,
like, a gene decides to turn on.
Like, I'm having a wonderful
day, and all of a sudden,
one of my genes
says, well, today
is a great day for cancer.
Let's turn on and have cancer.
And so, all of a
sudden, we start
to give power that these genes
are, in a sense, controlling
us, when in fact, no,
they are blueprints.
And as a blueprint,
they provide a pattern,
but they don't
tell you how you're
going to use the material.
They just say, here's
a building block.
And yet, how you're going
to use that building block
isn't determined by the gene.
It's determined by
the consciousness
of the individual who's
running the biology.
So in a sense,
conventional biology
perceives of the
body as a vehicle.
But in the conventional
biology, it's
a vehicle that's driven
by an automatic pilot
like an autopilot, and that
the autopilot are the genes.
So that how the vehicle
drives, and the character
of the vehicle, and the
attributes or deficiencies,
you can say, well, that has to
do with the autopilot genes.
The big mistake is is that,
partly, they're right.
The genes are indeed
involved with building blocks
to make the vehicle, but they've
had a big mistake in regard
who's driving the vehicle.
>>And this is where
your new biology
starts really kicking in.
And in fact, just for a
moment, to take percentages,
you've written that
anywhere from only 2% to 5%
of the disease, for example,
that our bodies manifest
is completely or
absolutely driven solely
by our genetic
structure, our DNA.
The rest is--?
>>An interaction of the DNA
and the character and quality
of which we run our lives.
So for example, go
back to the vehicle.
The vehicle comes off
the assembly line,
and there are two potential
buyers of this vehicle.
So you have, like, let's
say, an older woman who's
going to drive this car, and you
have this young teenager who's
going to drive the car.
Same vehicle comes off, but
the fate of that vehicle
is really which of the drivers
is going to own that vehicle.
If the teenager
drives that vehicle
and starts hitting the gas, and
hitting the brakes, and racing,
and all that, it's more
likely that vehicle--
>>Or a different system.
>>Actually, well, that's
the drive vehicle,
that's the mechanism
that makes it go.
If a teenager's
driving, it's going
to have a completely different
effect on the vehicle
than if this older person is
going to drive the car, which
will also have another
effect on the vehicle.
So then, when I talk
about down the road,
and I have this vehicle
and it's in a junkyard,
and you say, well,
what happened?
Was it because they
built the vehicle wrong?
And the answer is,
no, the vehicle
was probably pretty good.
It was the driver who
was responsible for how
to handle the car, and
to maintain the car,
and take care of the car.
And those that take care
of the car, the car lasts.
And those that beat
it up and abuse it,
it's in the junkyard faster.
The bodies are the same
things as these vehicles.
It depends on how you
want operate your vehicle.
And all of a sudden
why that's different
is, it gives power
to the driver,
while the conventional belief
gives power to the genes.
And this is the big difference,
because if it's your genes
and you don't select your
genes, as far as we know,
you can't change your
genes as far as we know.
So therefore, I say,
well, I have these genes,
and I didn't pick them,
and I can't change them,
and I'm powerless because the
genes are running the show,
we become victims.
And yet, you turn around
and say, no, wait.
The genes make the vehicle,
but how you use the vehicle's
how you drive the vehicle and
how you learn how to drive it.
Why that's important is because,
via different ways of learning
how to drive or different
driver education,
you can make a vehicle last,
or you can kill a vehicle
very quickly, and it
wasn't the vehicle's fault.
So our tendency is
to blame the vehicle
and ignore the
consequence of the driver.
And the new biology
is saying you better
look at who's driving,
how you're driving,
and this is especially true
with cardiovascular disease
and cancer.
And just interestingly,
just even
in the last week, the
American Cancer Society
revealed that 60%
or more of cancer
is avoidable by simply
changing diet or lifestyle.
And that's a very
profound statement,
because up to recent times,
cancer was a genetic disease.
Now we're finding, no,
the largest majority
of cancer-- and I think
their estimates are
conservative at
60%, I believe it's
a lot more-- the cancer is
a lifestyle consideration.
Cardiovascular disease, you want
to blame your heart and say,
my heart is not supporting me.
And the fact is,
well, if you're not
driving the vehicle
correctly, if you're
the kind of person
who hits the brakes
and then pushes your foot on the
gas, and then hits the brakes,
you're going to
stress the system.
When you have a
heart problem, it's
just manifesting
that you have stress.
Interestingly enough,
conventional medicine blames
the vehicle, says the
heart has a problem.
They provide medicines to try
to slow down the deterioration.
They don't even
provide medicines
to build the heart
back up again.
They're just lucky if
they can slow it down.
Dean Ornish, a physician
in San Francisco,
wrote a wonderful
book on his research
that revealed that he
took cardiac patients.
He didn't give them medications.
He said, what if I just
give you different ways
to handle stress?
How about if I show you a
better way to, like, mediate,
and to get centered?
And how about if I
provide you with a better
kind of diet for your lifestyle?
In other words, he changed
the parameters of their life,
but didn't provide any drugs.
The amazing results,
which were published,
revealed not only
did his patients,
actually, the deterioration
stop, but they actually
showed the heart got better.
And no other study
has ever shown that.
And what it really reveals
is what I was trying to say
is if I change how
I drive my vehicle,
my vehicle was never
really defective,
and it will come back
again if I do it correctly,
if I drive in a
healthy, sane manner.
>>What are some other
diseases that you're
finding have more to do with our
belief systems and lifestyle?
>>Autoimmune diseases.
Autoimmune means
self-destruction.
And so it's your
own immune system
is taking you apart
from the inside.
Again, we look at
it as a mechanism.
We say, well, something must
be wrong with the genes,
because look, these cells
are destroying ourselves.
When it turns out, no, it
is our own consciousness
driving ourselves into
the ground with beliefs
that are self-destructive.
The kind of beliefs that we are
given, especially as children,
very limiting and
self-sabotaging beliefs
like, oh, you won't
amount to very much,
or you're not a smart person,
or you don't deserve things.
When children,
especially under six,
hear these kind of
comments like, oh, you're
a stupid child, you're a sickly
child, we haven't, up to now,
recognized that
a child under six
is not conscious like you
and I are when we're adults.
That we can understand if
a parent yells and says,
you're a stupid kid,
they don't really
mean that you're a stupid kid.
They probably mean that they're
just anxious about something
they need to do, and
the child's acting up,
and they're just irritated, and
they're yelling at the child.
And so the child hears
they're a stupid kid.
If the child is
over six or seven,
the child has consciousness
enough to say,
well, I can see
mom is just upset,
and she's just saying
that because she's upset.
But we now recognize that
a child less than six,
essentially, is not in that
state of consciousness.
They're more in a
hypnotic trance.
And it's a period
of intense learning
of how a child is to fit into
this community of the family,
and how the family fits into the
community of life around them,
and how you fit into the world.
That's what's being learned.
A child less than six,
if they had consciousness
and they were trying
to learn this,
their thoughts would
interfere with the download
of the program.
So nature designed
it so children really
don't show the kind
of consciousness
as we show until about six.
Meaning the first six years
of its life, what it sees
and what it hears
are just downloaded
as this is the way life is.
And why that's relevant is then
if the same parent is yelling,
you're a stupid kid,
because they're irritated,
and the child is less
than six, the child's
not thinking in
consciousness of trying
to understand what's going on.
It's just a download,
I'm a stupid kid.
Well, what we have
failed to recognize
is that those pronouncements
are lodged in our subconscious
mind.
And it is now recognized
that our subconscious
mind runs 85% to
95% of our life.
So if we came through
a family where
there was this kind
of talk from a parent,
you know, irritated
parents, and talking
to kids like this, a child
that grows up in that family,
when they get older and that
is a fundamental learned thing,
I am a stupid child, or I
do not deserve something,
and that's built
into my subconscious,
then when I'm older
and 85%, 95% of my life
is run by that
subconscious, that's
a program that's in there.
It says, I'm stupid.
Now, where the problem
comes from is this.
Is that there are these
two minds, the conscious
and a subconscious, and
they work in tandem.
That when you're operating
from consciousness,
then you're running the show.
You put your hands on the wheel.
You drive the vehicle.
But most of the
time, if you think,
where is our consciousness?
Our consciousness is,
like, daydreaming, thinking
of the future, of some
kind of event or something
you want in your life, or
thinking about the past.
Who did what to who,
and what were the events
that were important
in your life?
Well, the point is, if my
consciousness is thinking
in the future or in the past,
which is its predominant place,
then it says, well, who's
running the show at the moment?
And all of a sudden,
that's where you find out,
well, that was the subconscious.
Now, here comes the conflict,
so most people should really
understand this.
Is that when the
subconscious is running it
and the conscious is busy,
the conscious being busy,
it doesn't observe
what the behavior is
that's coming from
the subconscious.
So for example, many
of us, including
myself, who have driven
a car for a long time
realize that you don't
have to pay attention
to the details of
driving the car
like you did the first day
you have a driver's permit.
And you got in the
car and you were just
mind boggled by all the things
you had to keep conscious,
like looking out the
mirror, watching the gauges,
making sure the pedals
are working properly,
looking out the windows.
And all this stuff
was, like, too much
for the conscious mind.
But then you realized
after you learn
how to drive a car
for a while, you never
really think about
those details.
That you could
just get in the car
and you could be
daydreaming about the party
you're going to go to.
If I make one point,
maybe people will get it,
and it's this.
Let's say I'm in that
car and I'm driving.
And let's say, for
example, someone's
in the passenger seat.
And I get so involved in
the discussion with them
that, sometime, I look out the
window and in a sheepish way
I realize I haven't
paid attention
to the road for the
last five minutes.
My consciousness was engaged.
Well, obviously, I'm
still driving the car,
and your car's driving OK, so
my driving was under control.
Well, who was
driving the vehicle?
And the answer is,
well, I have two minds,
conscious or subconscious.
Well, I can tell you,
my conscious mind
was engaged in the conversation.
That leaves my subconscious
as driving the vehicle
which, in fact, it was.
That's what the subconscious
does best, very complex details
without my having to watch them.
The critical point about this
whole little story is this.
While you were in
the conversation
and you weren't paying
attention, if I ask you,
did you observe the
character of how
you drove the car in that
10 minute period when
you didn't see
what was going on?
The answer is, of course not.
You didn't even know, you know,
you weren't paying attention
to that.
That is the point that
I really want to make.
When your consciousness
is engaged,
the subconscious takes over.
It drove the car.
But the critical
factor was this.
Because the consciousness
was engaged,
it didn't observe
the behavior that
was being run by
that subconscious.
So that if I have a
behavior that says,
I don't deserve something,
and I'm doing some job,
and yet I'm thinking about
the vacation that's coming up,
and my subconscious is
running the show, and it says,
well, you know, if you
think about it logically,
if I do the job right,
I'm going to get a raise.
Well, but I have a program that
says, I don't deserve things.
I got that when I was a kid.
So when I'm not
paying attention,
when I'm thinking
about the vacation,
and I start doing
things, I'm going
to make little
glitches and accidents.
Not because my
conscious was saying so,
but my subconscious
said, you don't deserve.
Well, if I do
everything right, that
means I should get the reward,
but if I start making mistakes,
then guess what?
I won't deserve.
And so, the point is, it
becomes a fulfilling prophecy
if I'm told I'm stupid.
Many of us take
exams, for example,
and get the exams back.
And then look at some
questions, you think,
my goodness, I knew the
answer to that question,
and I marked it wrong,
and I knew the answer.
What was the point?
If your subconscious
mind was programmed
that you were, let's
say, an average student,
an average student
can't get 'em all right.
An average student has to get
C. So what does that mean?
Well, when you're
not paying attention,
the moment you're
the subconscious
mind says, average?
Oh, well, I need to get only 70%
right, so I need to miss a few.
And it'll start checking
off wrong answers on ones
that you actually
know the answer for.
And then, two days later,
you get the exam back
and you, yourself,
are totally surprised.
How would I marked the wrong
answer, and I knew that?
And the point was,
subconscious was
running the show
pretty much then.
>>So let's take this
and extrapolate that
into our biology.
And first of all,
the subconscious,
as you have written,
it likes repetition,
it likes familiarity, meaning
these programs that are now
in our subconscious
were probably
created with repetition
and have become familiar,
maybe over a period
of time, maybe
through a traumatic event.
But give us a diagram of, say,
a middle-aged woman, breast
cancer, and how that could have
started within their being.
And I know there are a
thousand ways, but just--
>>There are a thousand,
but I can give you a good--
>>Just give an example.
>>I'll give you an example.
We live in a world that's
a male-dominated world,
patriarchal world.
It's clear.
If you're a woman in this world,
you're already second class.
You still have to
fight higher, OK?
So I'm a woman.
I find this world
very stressful to me.
My conscious mind
is thinking, oh,
what am I going
to do about this?
Myself subconscious
mind's very clear.
Says, well, I look
out at the world.
It's very obvious.
If I were not a woman, I
would be in a better position.
Well, what way would
I not be a woman?
How about if we eliminate
our secondary sexual
characteristics?
Not that the conscious mind
had any involvement with this.
It was just the quantification
of data in the subconscious
mind that said, yeah,
that would be a good idea.
But of course that
would mean then
removing breasts as
part of your character.
And so you start to destroy
your own breasts as what?
Because they were
giving me problems,
because they were making me
a woman in a man's world.
And so it had nothing to
do with consciousness,
but it had to do with stress.
The stress of trying
to survive in a world
where you're already
at a disadvantage why?
Because you have breasts.
And so the system will say,
yeah, I can help you with that.
I'll get rid of those
breasts for you.
And yet, that's
self-destruction.
And yet, well, if
you didn't handle
the stress in any other
way, then what other ways
are you leaving for the
system to handle the stress?
And so, that's
where the difference
of not dealing with
it in consciousness,
and letting the
subconscious run it,
because it's just very simple.
It says, oh, woman-- problem.
No.
No woman, no problem.
>>And it does
become very complex,
because this gets back to
even brain chemistry, where
other research has, not
indicated, but proven
that women have much lower
levels of serotonin, the feel
good chemical, than men
do in the same culture.
>>Dealing with the stresses.
So that if I have
to go out every day
and deal with the stress, how
can I feel good in that world?
And is it conscious
or unconscious?
And the answer is,
well, as I said,
consciousness doesn't even spend
most of its time being present.
Consciousness is
the one that allows
us to think outside
of where we are.
So when we're thinking
outside of where we are,
we are not being present.
We are now leaving
it to this equivalent
of a five-year-old
mentality, the subconscious.
And you just tell the
subconscious, ah, hey,
you know, being woman's hard.
So a five-year-kid says,
OK, don't be a woman.
Well, how can you do that?
And the answer is get rid
of the characteristics
of being a woman, OK?
And these are the
kinds of things.
I would like to
just add one more,
because I think
it's more profound.
And that is this.
I said over millennia,
the human biology
developed a system to self-heal.
It's always been
able to heal itself.
And yet, we find ourselves,
when anything's wrong,
we can't seem to heal
ourselves, and we always
go outside to seek help.
And I would say, well,
why would we do that?
And then I would
say, well, perhaps we
go back to when you were
developing in utero, which
is a time when we now know
you're already downloading
the awareness of the world
through your interaction--
>>In fact, you show a
wonderful film in your conf--
when you present at
conferences of a--
>>A sonogram.
>>--a sonogram of a, of a--
>>Of a fetus?
>>Of a fetus that
has been exposed
to a violent conversation.
>>Yeah.
And what it shows
is that if there's
an argument between, let's
say, the mother and the father,
that as the mother responds,
which is-- you know,
her response is an
emotional response, well,
how does she have an
emotional response?
The answer is, well, sends
chemistry through our body,
the chemicals of emotion.
Well, yeah, so she's going to
have this emotional response.
Yeah, but if she's
carrying a child,
the elements of the
blood are transferred
across the placenta.
And we only talk, usually,
about the nutritional elements,
and that's what's going
to feed the fetus.
And we've disregarded the
fact that blood carries
a lot more in it
than just nutrition.
It carries emotional chemistry,
and the organizing chemistry--
>>Hormones?
>>--d the hormones of the body.
So that if the mother is
responding to her world,
and she's emotionally
involved with this,
and her life might
be in, you know,
her security
threatened in some way,
well, that's going to get
her to physiologically get
into a fight or flight response,
and get into a protection
response.
The fetus is a passive
passenger in this case,
because the blood components
are going to cross the placenta.
Well, yes, the nutrition
is coming across,
but I'm also sending
those hormones across.
So whatever the mother
is experiencing,
so is the fetus at
that moment, and that's
what the sonogram showed.
That the moment this
argument was occurring,
this fetus was in shock.
It was actually, like, jumping
off the floor of the uterus
and arching its
back, going like, oh,
my gosh, involuntarily.
It doesn't actually know why,
except that the chemistry
is causing it to do so.
So if the violent arguments
or whatever they are repeat,
and this is a process where
the fetus is on some period,
getting this
repetitious pattern,
we already know that by
midway through pregnancy,
patterns are being downloaded.
And anything repeated then
becomes an important point
in the life of that child.
So that a child that comes
from an abusive relationship
between its parents is
going to be carrying
the character of that abusive
relationship in its memory
even before it's born.
And it applies to the same
thing as-- well, the point
was about health,
because what you realize
is that we are born
with doctors present.
There are doctors there
before we're born,
that you go to doctors on
checkups, and there's the,
oh, Johnny's got a cold.
Johnny's not well.
We have to take
him to the doctor.
Oh, something's
wrong with Johnny.
We have to take
him to the doctor.
Well, Johnny, if
he's less than six,
is in this programmable state.
So what's the program?
Johnny realizes that when he's
physiologically not in balance,
when he's in a dis-eased
state, that rather than Johnny
fixing himself, the first
step is to go to the doctor.
Because the program
is, you're sick?
First, we go to the doctor, then
the doctor will do something,
and then you'll get well.
Well, it's interesting
because this
is a program that interferes
with our innate ability
to heal ourselves.
Because it inserts a little
step as like a first step.
OK, you're sick.
You can heal yourself,
but the first step
is you have to go to the doctor.
And it's interesting,
because a lot of people
actually start to get better
as they're going to the doctor,
because they're just
fulfilling the step.
Because the rest of it
is innate healing anyway.
So we throw a little
stumbling block in the program
by saying before you can
activate your own healing,
you have to go visit the doctor.
>>Is this like when you take
your car into the mechanic,
it gets better on the way?
[LAUGHS]
>>You know, you
laugh, and yet, it's
really funny but more
serious than that,
because when you start to get
into the nature of quantum
mechanics, and energy fields,
and thoughts as energy fields,
and start to recognize that our
thoughts are directly involved
with creating our lives.
And that's a hard
thing for a lot
of people to understand, because
when you really get into this
and you recognize that our
lives are not accidents.
Our lives are actually
being programmed
through our own belief systems,
the issues of how we think
and how we respond to the world.
And a lot of people
don't want to own
that, because the first thing
you have to step back and say
is, I am responsible for
the world and my actions
in this world.
And then the quantum
physics says, yeah,
but it also extends to
things around you as well.
>>Very true.
This is the good news, bad
news part of all of this.
And actually, let's get to
the good news, bad news,
which is that,
yes, we can control
our destiny, our health,
the quality of our life
to a very large extent.
The bad news is, we've been
programmed to not take control,
and now we're scared to
step out of that box.
But let's use biology itself
to explain why this is true.
Just if you can.
I know it's asking a lot of you.
You don't have all your
tools and slides right now.
But can you just give us
a little understanding
of the cell, the membrane, how
environmental information is
programmed into our
cells and proteins,
and then creates a response?
>>OK.
The first thing is that
we should get everybody
an understanding
about who cells are,
and what they are in
relation to who we are.
Well, we look at
ourselves in the mirror
and think of ourselves
as a singular entity.
There's Bruce.
I look, I see myself.
There's this one person.
Well, that might be one person,
but if I would shrink myself
down to the size
of a cell and then
look at myself from the
perspective of that size,
I would see that I'm
not a single person.
I'm a community made
of 50 trillion cells.
It's the cells that are
the living elements.
I am only a collection
of living elements.
So when I use that
I, that's a global I
representing the consciousness
of 50 trillion cells.
so that--
>>A collective expression?
>>It's a collective expression.
That your body is
actually a community,
and health and disease
now can be reflected.
And is there harmony in
the community or disharmony
in the community?
And all of sudden that all
is like a politic of what's
going on.
And then you have to recognize,
well, what are your thoughts?
Well, your thoughts
represent a central voice,
the community, all
the inputs coming
from all the cells
and their responses
are like a government
in our head.
And our brain is
more or less reading
what's going on
throughout our body,
reading what's going on
in the world around us,
trying to integrate
our body to live
in harmony with the
world around us.
So it's all based
on interpretations,
what the cells are experiencing
and what we are experiencing
outside of ourselves, what
the environment is offering.
And the relevance about that
is, then when we have thoughts,
we don't realize that our
thoughts are feeding back
to our cells.
And then if you really go
into our thoughts, which
psychologists tell us 70%
or more of our thoughts
are negative and redundant,
then you think, OK,
what if you were a
citizen in a nation
with 50 trillion citizens?
And every day, you
turn on the radio,
and every day the
government is telling you,
today is a bad day.
We're not going to make it.
Life doesn't look really
good for us today.
It's like, what are
our chances of success?
Not too good.
Health looks bad.
If we hear this every day
on the radio or the TV,
that this report
keeps coming in,
there's a point where
the population gets
so weakened by this,
because it just breaks down
the-- it puts fear
into the system.
And cells are just like people.
In fact, they have all the
same functions as people.
And if I tell a cell that
its life is threatened,
it will, like a person,
get into a protection state
to protect itself from
whatever that threat is.
Well, the interesting
thing about studying
these cloned cells
is, you realize
that there are two states
of life for a cell.
A cell is either in a state of
growth, taking in nutrients,
and growing, and becoming
part of the community,
and a matrix making it tight,
or a cell is in protection
if threats are out there.
Well, the difference of
growth and protection
is, when you're
in protection, you
don't become part
of a community.
Protection is you
wall yourself off.
And if you wall
yourself off, you
are now separating yourself
from the community.
>>You're not
receiving nutrients.
>>You're not receiving
the nutrients.
You're in protection.
The best analogy
is, in the old days,
when we were concerned
the Russians we're
going to bomb us, we
built bomb shelters.
So the analogy, now, I'm
going to give you is exactly
the same, whether it's
a community of people
or a community of cells.
It's the same for
living organisms.
So let's use the people because
we're familiar with that.
So let's say we're
in some community,
and it's a wonderful day.
The factories are going,
the community is growing,
they're making things,
the schools are going,
people are getting education,
the stores are open,
business is going.
The community's in a state
of growth, economic growth,
if you look at it.
Everything is in process of--
>>Prosperity.
>>--prosperity.
And then, all of a sudden,
there's an air raid alarm.
Air raid siren goes off.
Well, when the air raid siren
goes off, where do people go?
They don't stay on the job.
They leave the job and
go into the bomb shelter,
because that's where
protection's going to be.
But then, there's
an immediate point.
Well, if people are
in the bomb shelter,
then what about the job?
What about the work?
What about the prosperity?
And the answer is,
well, that's on hold,
because we're in the
bomb shelter right now.
If it's just an alert, you know,
like a test, 10 minutes later,
everybody comes out
of the bomb shelter,
and you go back to work.
No big deal.
Just a 10-minute
interruption of the day.
But imagine this problem.
The air raid siren goes off.
Everybody leaves the job, and
they go in the bomb shelter,
but there's no all clear.
What will happen then?
And the answer is, well,
they'll stay alive for a while,
as long as they have the
materials in the bomb shelter.
But nobody's making
any new materials
because the
factories are closed.
And there's no
business going on,
so there's no energy
going, exchanging.
You have what you have
in your bomb shelter.
The moment you use up the
material in the bomb shelter,
you begin to die,
because you're not
taking anything in any more,
and the work has stopped.
>>How does this look in the body
when we experience trauma or--
>>The cells shut down
their growth processes,
wall themselves
off in protection
for an insult of
something coming,
and they're preparing for this.
And what's interesting
about it is the body
does have a great
defense system.
But the defense system
was never something
that was designed to run 24/7.
This defense system was to,
like, OK, something happens?
Good, we fix it.
We're back on the track.
Everybody's going
back to work again.
But the idea of anticipating
something that's
going to happen, a threat, and
then getting in that posture,
and holding yourself and
waiting, and waiting,
and waiting, and waiting,
and there is no resolution.
Just more threat, more
threat, more threat.
That the cells in the threat
posture, they're not growing.
And so our bodies stop growing,
because it's a simple logic
thing.
It says, if I'm going
to have an emergency,
I'm going to need my energy.
To do what?
To run, or fight, or something.
And I got to
mobilize this energy.
So it would be foolish to
waste energy on something
when you could use
that energy to run.
If a saber-toothed
tiger is chasing you,
and you start spending
your energy, let's say,
because you have a
bacterial infection,
and you start
fighting the bacteria,
you put energy into
that, maybe you've
put in just the
amount of energy that
would have been needed just
to get your foot from being
in that tiger's mouth
as you're running.
That little bit of extra energy.
So the intelligence
of the system
says, well, I'm not
going to spend energy
on things that are
just temporary.
I need to save my energy
because if I need to run,
I need to run.
So it will shut off growth.
>>And that brings up
a really good point.
In times past, you had
storms that blew through.
You might have a
saber-tooth on your tail.
But today, you're
driving automobiles,
you're listening to the news,
you're trying to multitask.
We have so much more
bombardment of our senses
and potential for these
negative messages.
Is this what is taxing
our immune system?
>>Absolutely.
It attacks the immune system.
It's interesting,
because I said there's
parallels that exist between
the body and a nation.
Because a nation is
a living organism,
where we, for example, are the
cells in the United States,
and that the United States
is a living organism.
And as a living
organism, guess what?
It has an adrenal system,
it has an immune system.
The adrenal system is the
Department of Defense.
That's what it is.
To mobilize us, to
protect us from things
that come from outside
and threaten us.
But we also have
an immune system
within which protects our world.
And within, it takes
care of the environment,
for example, gives health,
education, and welfare
for the recipients
inside the nation,
giving them maintenance.
Well, think about it this way.
Same as in the body
is in the nation.
When we start to think
that we're threatened more
from the outside, where
do we mobilize our energy?
Adrenal system,
protection, defense.
Well, what does that
mean in the government?
Well, we put our money into
the Department of Defense.
More planes, more
army, and all that.
Yeah, but you put
this money into it,
where did you get
the money from?
Well, you had to take
it from something else.
Guess where we take it from?
The Environmental Protection
Agency, education, welfare,
health.
That's called the immune system.
So we suppress the immune
system by shorting the funding--
>>There goes our vitality.
>>--and our vitality while
we're in a defense posture.
So the more we keep
throwing into defense,
and the more we keep taking
away from the interior,
there's a point where
people start to realize,
you know, we're falling
apart on the inside,
and the threats on the
outside aren't really
manifesting themselves.
Maybe we should elect
a different president.
And then what do we do?
Well, we have
another president who
gets elected for what reason?
Because he's going
to tell people,
I'm going to take
care you in home.
Well, the other guy says, I was
protecting you from the threat.
Well, it depends on where people
believe where the threats are.
If it's greater in the inside,
we elect that president,
and what does he do?
He takes the money
that was being
put into the
Department of Defense
and puts it back into social
services, welfare, EPA.
And so the reality
is then we build up
the health of the country
until our next fear,
and then we do this
back and forth.
In the human body,
it's interesting
that when we get in
a defense posture
because our adrenal
glands are preparing us
for fight or flight, the
very same hormones that
fund the adrenal system and
get the energy into our arms
and legs so we
can run and fight,
the same hormones shut
off the immune system.
And matter of fact, the medical
people use those hormones.
If I was going to graft
an organ into your body
and I didn't want your
immune system to reject it,
what they do and
what they've done
is they give the recipient
of the graft stress hormones.
And the reason is, in
the high stress hormones,
it suppresses the immune
system and prevents
a rejection of the graft.
Yeah, but that's an
experimental situation.
I want to know, what
about a normal person
having a normal day?
And that is, when my adrenal
system is activated because I'm
in threat or fear of
my life, I will then
engage these hormones,
which will send blood
to my arms and legs because
those are the structures I'm
going to use to protect myself.
But at the expense of removing
it from other systems,
including the viscera,
which is growth,
and the same hormones shut
down the immune system,
so I don't put energy into
my Environmental Protection
Agency, so to speak.
As a result, then we
start to get sick.
And it's interesting,
because people
think, well, you
caught this illness.
And what we now realize,
that's not true.
Almost everyone, me,
you, everyone out there,
is already infected with most of
the organisms that humans have.
They're called
opportunistic organisms.
Well, that's a wonderful name.
What does it mean?
You give them the opportunity,
they I'll take it.
But if you don't give
them the opportunity,
meaning if you're in a state of
harmony, health, and balance,
and your immune system
is working at its normal
functional level,
these organisms,
even though they're
in your blood--
and I can take a blood sample
and show you got viruses
and bacteria in there-- that
these organisms cannot grow
when the immune system
is being funded.
But the moment you pull the
funds out of the immune system
because you're under
stress, these organisms
take that opportunity
and start to flourish
and all of a sudden, we
start to express an illness.
And the fact was, well, we
didn't just catch that illness.
We already had it.
And yet, when we take away our
own self-defense mechanisms
of the interior, then we
start to manifest them.
What happens in our country?
It's exactly the same thing.
Our education system has gone
through the floor, it stinks.
Our health care system is one of
the lowest in the modern world,
and in the first world.
All the characteristics
of vitality, and survival,
and prenatal health
care, and natal--
>>And infant mortality.
>>-and infant mortality.
We're down to some very
surprisingly low levels.
>>Yes.
>>And the issues about
that in our government,
and our maintenance
of ourselves.
Why?
Are we not prosperous?
Oh, yeah.
We're prosperous, but
where's the money going?
Defense, military, aggression,
all these other things.
And why is this a problem?
Because nobody's taking care
of the population, the cells.
>>And what are we
doing to ourselves
in trying to keep up with the
engine that's been created,
the treadmill, so to speak, that
we've created for ourselves?
We're downing three or four,
maybe, shots of espresso a day.
What is that doing,
in terms of--
>>Well, that's where we go back
to the driver of the vehicle.
If I want to keep my
vehicle going, and I realize
I don't have the energy.
So what do I do?
I take a lot more caffeine.
Well, the fact is,
geez, you know,
you've already bypassed
the normal functioning
of the system, because
where was the innate energy
you would have had?
And the answer's, I'm
putting it into other things.
So now I'm running
it off of caffeine.
Well, that's now chemically
interfering with the mechanism.
And then you wonder why, when
the mechanism is stressed,
and you wonder, well,
what's the problem?
The answer is, if
you were running it
in a holistic, normal,
healthy fashion,
you would have had the energy
to run the system anyway.
But if you're stressed,
and you're low on energy,
then you start looking
for these outside things.
And so it's like a vehicle.
You could run the car on
methanol, you know, alcohol.
Boy, dragsters race on that.
Yeah, but you run your car on
that, it won't be very long
and you'll burn that engine up
very quickly because it's not
the normal nutrition for a car.
And our nutrition is off,
and our health is off,
and it's because
we're just not aware.
And it's interesting,
because you say, well,
why aren't we aware?
And it's unfortunate,
because you already
brought up the problem.
For example, the
pharmaceutical industry
is not interested
in us being healthy.
If we were healthy, they
wouldn't have a business.
So propagating ill health
underneath the cover,
pretense of healing us.
>>But doctors are supposed
to know better, aren't they?
>>Yeah.
Oh, I got to make a
real important point.
And it is a real
important point, OK?
And the point is this.
In the United States today,
the leading cause of death
is medical intervention.
It far exceeds cardiovascular
disease and cancer.
It's some number
like 740,000 people
die from getting
medical treatment.
Now, all of a
sudden, you say, oh.
>>Which is a staggering number.
>>It's a staggering number.
So staggering that nobody
even talks about it.
Which to me is,
like, the omission
of that is the big problem.
>>Really.
>>And the issue is, well then
there's a tendency to say,
oh, it's the medical doctor.
And I want to say right now,
on anybody that's listening,
that's medical bashing.
And that's really
inappropriate and misdirected
for this reason.
Doctors practice to the
level they have been trained.
The issue is, it's the
training that's off.
It's the academic
institutions that
are teaching an old-fashioned,
outdated biology.
The biology of genes, and
victimization, and all that.
The issues come from the
pharmaceutical industry
which provides
post-graduate education.
>>Don't doctors receive
some of their, what is it?
Your continuing
education credentialing,
credential process
through drug companies?
>>Through the
pharmaceutical industry.
So the reps go to the doctor and
give them, like, mini-courses.
These drugs are good for
this, and these drugs
are good for this.
But now we find out,
you know, the reps
have been hyping a lot of
the drugs to sell the drugs,
telling doctors to use
drugs that they're not
even recommended,
the drugs are not
recommended to even
use for these issues.
So the point is, the doctors
practice as best as they can
in the education
that they receive.
If the education they
receive is lacking or failing
in some degree, it
will manifest that
in the poor performance
of the doctor.
Then we can turn around
and say, well, the doctors
are causing a problem.
The answer is, no, they're not.
They're doing the best
that they were trained.
Now, the issue is, you want to
focus on where the problem is?
Go back to the academic
institution, and especially
the pharmaceutical
industry, because this
is where the money
comes from that
says this is what you teach.
>>Will they fund the research?
>>They will not fund the
research on energy healing.
>>Right.
Exactly.
>>And the reason is because if
I can heal myself with energy,
I'm not going to buy drugs.
And if I'm not
going to buy drugs,
then what do you think
this company that's
making all this
money is going to do?
>>I was privy, years
ago, doing a story
for the news in my news days.
And I was given access
that I probably should not
have had to the
funding list for all
the departments
and the projects.
I was absolutely shocked to find
out the percentage of projects
that are funded by those
who have the greatest
vested interest in the
outcome of the research.
>>This is why the
conversation we're
having is not on ABC and CBS.
>>Oh, yes.
>>And the reason is
they get their money
from the pharmaceutical
industry.
I saw Peter Jennings do a
show called "Bitter Medicine."
And I saw, when he started
to show and he said,
I want you to know that our
funding sponsors are mainly
from the pharmaceutical industry
and that this influences
the program that we're
going to talk about.
And then goes in and does
talk about the atrocities
that-- I call them
atrocities, anyway,
because they're
knowingly interfering
with people's lives.
These drug reps
and manufacturers
are knowingly selling drugs
that in no way help people.
And in fact, the side
effects are more toxic,
in a sense that-- here's
a statistic that's
true-- 300,000, 300,000
people die every year
from taking prescription drugs
because the drugs are toxic.
And the relevance about
that is, and they're
talking about marijuana
smokers out there,
and they're killing
300,000 people a year?
And that's that old
magic show, look, pay
attention to this over here and
don't look behind the curtain.
That's all it is.
And the reality is
it's going to have
to change if we want to survive.
And the reality is we have
to take responsibility
for our own health.
And we cannot keep
putting it off,
that if there's
something wrong with me,
somebody else is
going to fix it.
That's an old belief system
based on a mechanistic approach
that the body is
just this machine.
The reality is, when we
put ourselves in as drivers
and recognize how we drive
the vehicle determines
the health of the vehicle,
I mean, a driver knows that.
A person who really loves their
car takes care of that car.
They put in the good nutrition,
the right gas, high quality
oil, all the lubricants.
They make sure they
put in good stuff.
They love their car.
They want it to run.
They take less
care of themselves.
They put in worse nutrition,
and worse gas in their own body
than they do in their car.
Their car will last
longer than they will.
And what's the point?
The point is, if you're
looking at that vehicle,
and so concerned about that,
you could take that concern
and put it into this vehicle.
Because this vehicle, if
you start to run it right,
you eat well, get out of
all this processed food,
with all the chemicals
from the chemical industry,
the same pharmaceutical
people, the drugs in the meat,
and the food, all this
genetic engineering stuff.
This is a disaster
in regard to what
is normal, what we evolved with.
Humans evolved using the
environment the way it was.
Our distortion of
the environment,
it causes the
distortion of the human.
And that we have to own
this, because as we destroy
the environment,
we're actually going
to have to own up to the fact
that we are that environment.
And that that
environment reflects us.
As the environments get worse--
>>That's a train wreck
waiting to happen.
>>It's in the process
of already happening.
You're killing 740,000 people a
year with a healing profession,
then we ought to
stop right there.
I mean, if that number
just got real enough,
that people just owned
it, it would stop.
I mean, let's own it.
Let's say 740,000 people
are killed by this process.
If it was, you know,
marijuana, 740,000,
they'd have marijuana
police at every door,
arresting, and you
know, killing marijuana
everywhere to get rid of it.
740,000 people are dying
from the health industry.
But they call that,
that's the risk of health.
And I thought, well,
that's a big enough risk
that I don't think we want
to dabble in that area.
>>So now we're back to
the good news, bad news.
We can control--
>>Yes.
>>--the quality of our life,
the quality of our health--
>>Yes.
>>Et cetera, to a
very large extent.
>>Yes.
>>And yet, we have been
brainwashed into believing that
we don't have--
>>That we're victims.
>>We're victims, and
we don't have the power
to really do-- do you really
want to go outside the system?
Because now you're up against
a disease that looks scary.
And now, you've just told us it
is a little bit scary in that
a lot of this programming is
in a part of our mind we're not
even aware of.
Now, where do we go from here?
>>Well, where we have
to go through here
is to find out, A,
if we're running this
and we're driving this
vehicle, this life,
are we using good
driving skills?
Do we have driving training?
The training that is actually
detrimental to the survival
of the system, which, the truth
is, almost everybody does.
And the point is, well,
can you retrain that?
And the answer's of course you
can, and there are processes.
Now, psychology,
when it was linked
to the conventional
medical reality,
looked at us as
biochemical machines.
Psychology used to
be trying to get
an understanding of the mind and
changing beliefs to fix health.
Psychology, well,
especially psychiatry,
because it's more
medically-oriented,
has even given up on that
and just said, oh, yeah it's
a chemical imbalance,
and that's what you need,
is more chemistry.
>>More drugs.
And the reality is, boy, I
would pull away from all these
right away because
that's not the issue.
The issue is really
understanding
the predominant control
of the subconscious, how
the subconscious was programmed
to give us life characters,
and training, and abilities to
fit into our world, how these
were passed on to us
by parents who weren't
good drivers themselves,
so they're just
propagating the same bad
driving skills generation
after generation, that we
are recipients of such skills
that are not supporting us.
But there are ways through this
new form of psychology called
energy psychology to actually
go back in and reprogram
these fundamental beliefs,
identify which beliefs are you
carrying in your life today
that are not supporting you.
And that's the issue.
>>And you partner
up with a person
that does a beautiful
job of this.
And you often present
together because you're
two halves of the same
story, in essence.
>>That was an exciting
thing because I
used to end my lectures with
the thing as you just said.
Well, yup, your beliefs
are controlling this thing
and they're
destroying it as well.
And then people
would immediately
say, what do I do about it?
And I really didn't
have much answer,
except my way when I did it,
because before I knew Rob,
it was becoming mindful.
The Buddhist concept
of mindfulness.
Don't let your
consciousness keep
being in the future
and the past.
Bring it to the
present and listen
to what your thoughts are,
and watch what you're doing.
Is it supporting you or not?
But Rob Williams, my dear
friend, I met him years later,
and he had developed one
of these energy psychology
processes.
One of many different ones.
I actually just like working
with Rob's because there's
an integrity issue.
Rather than, in
his program, people
trying to change other people,
that his program provides
facilitators that allow a
person to change themselves.
So there's not an outside person
telling you what you need.
The protocol really gets you
to get into your own belief
system, and your own
higher self to see
what changes need
to be manifested.
And so, I appreciate that
because an outside person
is only giving you their
opinion of what's wrong.
And you're the only
one that really knows.
>>Yeah.
>>And this process
called Psych-K actually
is an ability to identify those
programs that were installed
into our subconscious when
we were less than six,
these programs that
I said that are
the primary programs
of our lives,
to identify them even
though our consciousness has
no identity of what they are.
>>And we're going
to be talking to Rob
in just another few minutes
as a matter of fact.
And I thank you so much
for your time and energy.
You're just an
incredible presenter.
Your information is
phenomenal, and to me, it's
really life-changing.
It should be
Earth-changing information,
as I'm sure it is
becoming already.
>>I'm one of the
happy guys myself.
I'm a student of it.
I've learned my own self.
So to see that I went from
what my former life is
to my current life, it was
just changing awareness.
>>Big paradigm shift--
>>Absolutely.
>>--and that's what
we're ready for.
Thank you so much.
>>Thank you for
this opportunity.
>>If you find this
work intriguing,
you'll want to see the
interview with Rob Williams.
Rob talks about
the practical end
of reprogramming
those subconscious
beliefs that no longer serve us.
Meanwhile, Bruce's book,
The Biology of Belief,
is a must-read for
anyone who chooses
to know how our bodies actually
respond to our environment.
In spite of its roots
in the hard science
of cellular biology, it's very
readable and entertaining.
Thanks for watching.